doc: Merges CLOUDP-274025 docs & examples branch - DONT MERGE YET (#3079)
mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas: examples/migrate_cluster_to_advanced_cluster/module_maintainer/README.md

# Module Maintainer - `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`

> The purpose of this example is to demonstrate how a Terraform module can help in the migration from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of this example is to demonstrate how a Terraform module definition can migrate from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` while minimising impact to its clients.
```

Reviewer 2: Thanks. Changed in 43a873150c0cbbaf126a898b1f4cdf394008ced5

> The purpose of this example is to demonstrate how a Terraform module definition can migrate from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` while minimising impact to its clients.

Reviewer 3: we typically default to American spellings
```suggestion
The purpose of this example is to demonstrate how a Terraform module definition can migrate from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` while minimizing impact to its clients.
```

Author: changed

The example contains three module versions which represent the three steps of the migration:

Step | Purpose | Resources
--- | --- | ---
[Step 1](./v1) | Baseline | `mongodbatlas_cluster`
[Step 2](./v2) | Migrate to advanced_cluster with no change in variables or plan | `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`
[Step 3](./v3) | Use the latest features of advanced_cluster | `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`

The rest of this document summarizes the different implementations:

> - [Step 1: Module `v1` Implementation Summary](#step-1-module-v1-implementation-summary)

Reviewer 3: should this be an ordered list? Could also remove the "step x" language if converted

Reviewer 2: No strong opinion, but would prefer to keep it as is because it doesn't have to be done in order and Step X aligns with the table above

  - [`variables.tf`](#variablestf)
  - [`main.tf`](#maintf)
  - [`outputs.tf`](#outputstf)
- [Step 2: Module `v2` Implementation Changes and Highlights](#step-2-module-v2-implementation-changes-and-highlights)
  - [`variables.tf` unchanged from `v1`](#variablestf-unchanged-from-v1)
  - [`versions.tf`](#versionstf)
  - [`main.tf`](#maintf-1)
  - [`outputs.tf`](#outputstf-1)
- [Step 3: Module `v3` Implementation Changes and Highlights](#step-3-module-v3-implementation-changes-and-highlights)
  - [`variables.tf`](#variablestf-1)
  - [`main.tf`](#maintf-2)
  - [`outputs.tf`](#outputstf-2)

## Step 1: Module `v1` Implementation Summary

> This module creates a `mongodbatlas_cluster`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This module creates a `mongodbatlas_cluster`.
```

Author: changed

### [`variables.tf`](v1/variables.tf)
An abstraction for the `mongodbatlas_cluster` resource:

> - Not all arguments are exposed, but the arguments follow the schema closely
> - `disk_size` and `auto_scaling_disk_gb_enabled` are mutually exclusive and validated in the `precondition` in `main.tf`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Not all arguments are exposed, but the arguments follow the schema closely.
- `disk_size` and `auto_scaling_disk_gb_enabled` are mutually exclusive and validated in the `precondition` in `main.tf`.
```

Author: changed

### [`main.tf`](v1/main.tf)
It uses `dynamic` blocks to represent:
- `tags`
- `replication_specs`
- `regions_config` (nested inside replication_specs)

### [`outputs.tf`](v1/outputs.tf)
- Expose some attributes of `mongodbatlas_cluster` but also the full resource with `mongodbatlas_cluster` output variable:
```terraform
output "mongodbatlas_cluster" {
  value       = mongodbatlas_cluster.this
  description = "Full cluster configuration for mongodbatlas_cluster resource"
}
```

## Step 2: Module `v2` Implementation Changes and Highlights
This module uses HCL code to create a `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource that is compatible with the input variables of `v1`.
The module supports standalone usage when there is no existing `mongodbatlas_cluster` and also upgrading from `v1` using a `moved` block.

### [`variables.tf`](v2/variables.tf) unchanged from `v1`
### [`versions.tf`](v2/versions.tf)

> - `required_version` of Terraform CLI bumped to `1.8` for `moved` block [support](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework/resources/state-move) between resource types
> - `mongodbatlas.version` bumped to `1.27.0` for new `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` v2 schema support

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `required_version` of Terraform CLI bumped to `1.8` for `moved` block [support](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework/resources/state-move) between resource types.
- `mongodbatlas.version` bumped to `1.27.0` for new `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` v2 schema support.
```

### [`main.tf`](v2/main.tf)

> - `locals.replication_specs` an intermediate variable transforming the `variables` to a compatible [replication_specs](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/resources/advanced_cluster%2520%2528preview%2520provider%2520v2%2529#replication_specs-1) for `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`
>   - We use the Terraform builtin [range](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/functions/range) function (`range(old_spec.num_shards)`) to flatten `num_shards`
>   - We expand `read_only_specs` and `electable_specs` into nested attributes
>   - We use the `var.provider_name` in the `region_configs.*.instance_size`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `locals.replication_specs` an intermediate variable transforming the `variables` to a compatible [replication_specs](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/resources/advanced_cluster%2520%2528preview%2520provider%2520v2%2529#replication_specs-1) for `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`
  - We use the Terraform builtin [range](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/functions/range) function (`range(old_spec.num_shards)`) to flatten `num_shards`.
  - We expand `read_only_specs` and `electable_specs` into nested attributes.
  - We use the `var.provider_name` in the `region_configs.*.instance_size`
```

Author: changed

- `moved` block:
```terraform
moved {
  from = mongodbatlas_cluster.this
  to   = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this
}
```
- `resource "mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster" "this"`

>   - We reference the `local.replication_specs` as input to `replication_specs` (`replication_specs = local.replication_specs`)
>   - Tags can be passed directly instead of the dynamic block (`tags = var.tags`)
> - Adds `data "mongodbatlas_cluster" "this"` to avoid breaking changes in `outputs.tf` (see below)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - We reference the `local.replication_specs` as input to `replication_specs` (`replication_specs = local.replication_specs`).
  - Tags can be passed directly instead of the dynamic block (`tags = var.tags`).
- Adds `data "mongodbatlas_cluster" "this"` to avoid breaking changes in `outputs.tf` (see below).
```

Author: changed

### [`outputs.tf`](v2/outputs.tf)

> - All outputs can use `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` except for
>   - `replication_specs`, we use the `data.mongodbatlas_cluster.this.replication_specs` to keep the same format
>   - `mongodbatlas_cluster`, we use the `data.mongodbatlas_cluster.this` to keep the same format

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- All outputs can use `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` except for:
  - `replication_specs`, which uses `data.mongodbatlas_cluster.this.replication_specs` to keep the same format.
  - `mongodbatlas_cluster`, which uses the `data.mongodbatlas_cluster.this` to keep the same format.
```

Author: changed

## Step 3: Module `v3` Implementation Changes and Highlights
This module adds variables to support the latest `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` features while staying compatible with the old input variables.
The module supports standalone usage when there is no existing `mongodbatlas_cluster` and also upgrading from `v1` using a `moved` block.
The module also supports changing an existing `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` created in `v2`.

### [`variables.tf`](v3/variables.tf)

> - Add `replication_specs_new`, this is almost a full mirror of the `replication_specs` of the latest `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` schema

Reviewer 4: Can we add a link to the replication_specs section you are referring to here? 

```suggestion
- Add `replication_specs_new`, this is almost fully equivalent to the `replication_specs` of the latest `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` schema
```

Reviewer 2: Thanks! Changed in 9d3c89252ff66dfe1b0fb1bc840b424603b7bfec

> - Add `replication_specs_new`, this is almost fully equivalent to the [`replication_specs`](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/resources/advanced_cluster%2520%2528preview%2520provider%2520v2%2529#replication_specs-1) of the latest `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` schema

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Add `replication_specs_new`. This is almost fully equivalent to the [`replication_specs`](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/resources/advanced_cluster%2520%2528preview%2520provider%2520v2%2529#replication_specs-1) of the latest `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` schema.
```

Author: changed

>   - Use a `[]` for default to allow continued usage of the old `replication_specs`
>   - Usage of `optional` to simplify the caller
> - Add `default` to `instance_size` and `provider_name` as these are not required when `replication_specs_new` is used
> - Change `[]` default to `replication_specs` to allow usage of `replication_specs_new`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Use a `[]` for default to allow continued usage of the old `replication_specs`.
  - Usage of `optional` to simplify the caller.
- Add `default` to `instance_size` and `provider_name` as these are not required when `replication_specs_new` is used.
- Change `[]` default to `replication_specs` to allow usage of `replication_specs_new`.
```

Author: thanks, changed

### [`main.tf`](v3/main.tf)
- Add *defaults* to old variables in `locals`:
  - `old_disk_size`
  - `old_instance_size`
  - `old_provider_name`

> - Add `_old` suffix to `locals.replication_specs` to make conditional code (see below) more readable
> - Add `precondition` for `replication_specs` to validate only `var.replication_specs_new` or `replication_specs` is used

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Add `_old` suffix to `locals.replication_specs` to make conditional code (see below) more readable.
- Add `precondition` for `replication_specs` to validate only `var.replication_specs_new` or `replication_specs` is used.
```

Author: thanks, changed

### [`main.tf`](v2/main.tf)
- `locals.replication_specs` an intermediate variable transforming the `variables` to a compatible [replication_specs](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/resources/advanced_cluster%2520%2528preview%2520provider%2520v2%2529#replication_specs-1) for `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`.
  - We use the Terraform builtin [range](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/functions/range) function (`range(old_spec.num_shards)`) to flatten `num_shards`.
  - We expand `read_only_specs` and `electable_specs` into nested attributes.
  - We use the `var.provider_name` in the `region_configs.*.instance_size`.
- `moved` block:
```terraform
moved {
  from = mongodbatlas_cluster.this
  to   = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.this
}
```
- `resource "mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster" "this"`
  - We reference the `local.replication_specs` as input to `replication_specs` (`replication_specs = local.replication_specs`).
  - Tags can be passed directly instead of the dynamic block (`tags = var.tags`).
- Adds `data "mongodbatlas_cluster" "this"` to avoid breaking changes in `outputs.tf` (see below).

> ### [`outputs.tf`](v2/outputs.tf)

Reviewer 4: @EspenAlbert same here.. just asking for confirmation but I think we need to update this section

Reviewer 2: Thanks. Added todo here: a8b9c007494629d10e99628dfe4f186c44aadd1e

- Change `[]` default to `replication_specs` to allow usage of `replication_specs_new`.

### [`main.tf`](v3/main.tf)
- Add *defaults* to old variables in `locals`:
  - `old_disk_size`
  - `old_instance_size`
  - `old_provider_name`
- Add `_old` suffix to `locals.replication_specs` to make conditional code (see below) more readable.
- Add `precondition` for `replication_specs` to validate only `var.replication_specs_new` or `replication_specs` is used.
```terraform
    precondition {
      condition     = !((local.use_new_replication_specs && length(var.replication_specs) > 0) || (!local.use_new_replication_specs && length(var.replication_specs) == 0))
      error_message = "Must use either replication_specs_new or replication_specs, not both."
    }
```
- Use a conditional for`replication_specs` in `resource "mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster" "this"`:
```terraform
  # other attributes...
  replication_specs      = local.use_new_replication_specs ? var.replication_specs_new : local.replication_specs_old
  tags                   = var.tags
```
- Use `count` for data source to avoid error when Asymmetric Shards are used:
```terraform

> data "mongodbatlas_cluster" "this" {

Reviewer 4: @EspenAlbert why are we using mondobatlas_cluster data source also for V3?

Reviewer 2: The module still supports old and new variable format to allow all users to be on the latest module version while using old format.

Reviewer 4: I get it on the old and new but my understanding is that even if they end up using the new variable format the final configuration is that they still have a `data "mongodbatlas_cluster" ...` in their module which is not really the final state we want them to be in. 

I don't think we should solve it now but we should know that as we are asking customers to move away from cluster, our examples can't leave them with a final dependency on it.

Does it make sense? Should we have a CLOUDP for this and do it after the release if we don't have time?

cc @lantoli

Author: @marcosuma cc @EspenAlbert I understand that it's good to leave it in V3 as some module users may still want to use the old cluster info yet.   Maybe deleting all dependencies to old cluster including outputs could be in a next V4 where module users can't use old cluster inputs/outputs anymore.   WDYT?

Reviewer 4: yes we must have that and yes it can be a V4 since in V3 we are still helping them how to keep backward compatibility

Author: ticket created: CLOUDP-304982

Author: resolving comment, also added to readiness list

Reviewer 2: Alright. Thanks @lantoli , didn't notice the continued thread here
